=pod

=head1 NAME

csutils - Change Set- and SCM-related tools

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document gives an overview over the various little helpers
that exist to perform common clearn-up- or repair-tasks.

=head1 LIST OF TOOLS

=over 4

=item * csutil_addchangedb metafile1 metafile2 ...

=item * csutil_addchangedb -

Loads the metadata for a change set from a list of files (STDIN when C<-> is
passed) and adds them to the flatfile DB.

=item * csutil_addcsdb metafile1 metafile2 ...

=item * csutil_addcsdb -

Loads the metadata for a change set from a list of files (STDIN when C<-> is
passed) and adds them to the changesetdb.

=item * csutil_bundlecs [-c] metafile bundlefile

Creates a change set bundle from the supplied metafile and bundlefile 
arguments. With -c, additionally canonicalize the metafile before bundling.

=item * csutil_canoncs metafile1 metafile2 ...

=item * csutil_canoncs -

Loads the metadata for a change set from a list of files (STDIN when C<-> is
passed) and converts each change set into one with canonical file paths. The
thusly transformed change set is serialized to STDOUT.

=item * csutil_commitbundle bundle1 bundle2 ...

Commits a list of change set bundles to the subversion repository.

=item * csutil_csdepadd csid depends_on deptype

Adds a dependency on C<depends_on> of type C<deptype> to the change set
with ID C<csid>.

=item * csutil_csdepdel --help

Deletes dependencies from a change set.

=item * csutil_csdeps --help

Lists dependencies for a change set.

=item * csutil_enqueuescm --bundle bundle1 bundle2 ...

=item * csutil_enqueuescm csid1 csid2 ...

Enqueues a list of CSIDs or bundles to SCM.

=item * csutil_csstatus --help

Print the status of one or more change sets to STDOUT.

=item * csutil_csstatusupdate csid status

Changes the status of C<csid> to C<status> in the changesetdb.

=item * csutil_cshist --help

Display the status of a change set.

=item * csutil_sendmsg --help

Send a Bloomberg message to an arbitrary recipient.

=item * csutil_csidswept csid1 csid2 ...

Reveals if a change set given through its CSID has been swept into RCS.

=item * csutil_overlap movetype file1 file2 ...

Returns all CSIDs of C<movetype> from staging area that contain any of
C<file1>, C<file2>, etc.

=back

=head1 AUTHORS

These tools have been written by Alan Grow E<lt>agrow@bloomberg.netE<gt> and
Tassilo von Parseval E<lt>tvonparseval@bloomberg.netE<gt>

=cut
